
=== Page 1 ===
Intent-Driven Single-Channel sEMG Classification:
A Real-Time BCI Architecture Using Zero-Shot
Calibration and Temporal Smoothing
Arpita Kulkarni1, Priyanka S 2, Harsha Bharadwaj 2, Guru Raj Patil 2, and Keerthana 2
B.N.M. Institute of Technology, Bengaluru, India
1Dept. of Electronics & Communication Engineering
2Dept. of Computer Science & Engineering
email@domain.com
Abstract—Abstract—Real-time sEMG-based gesture recogni-
tion using high-density sEMG sensors or computationally ex-
pensive deep learning architectures is the norm. This makes it
difficult and expensive for edge devices to implement. Although
the use of a single-channel AC-coupled amplifier is a cost-effective
option for sEMG-based systems, this approach is limited by the
spatial ambiguity and cancellation effects present during complex
gestures. This work outlines a proposed architecture for a
Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) system aimed at addressing the
aforementioned limitations of the single-channel amplifier-based
sEMG-based systems. We propose the use of an ”anatomical
hack” approach to the sEMG sensor placement by positioning
the sensors horizontally to capture the polarity-sensitive fine
motor actuations. In addition, we propose the use of a 3-second
zero-shot onboarding procedure to account for the effects of
skin impedance variations. We also propose the use of a 600ms
reaction time purge during the training procedure to account for
human latency. Our proposed system achieves a raw statistical
accuracy of 75.46% over four subjects. This is further refined to
provide a stable user interface using a 5-frame temporal majority
vote approach. The proposed system achieves a signal processing
and inference using the proposed XGBoost approach within 9.46
ms/frame.
Index Terms—Brain-Computer Interface, sEMG, XGBoost,
Real-time Processing, Digital Signal Processing, Zero-Shot Cali-
bration
I. INTRODUCTION
The translation of raw human biosignals into reliable digital
commands remains a primary challenge in the development
of Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCIs) and accessible pros-
thetics. While laboratory-grade solutions frequently utilize
High-Density surface Electromyography (HD-sEMG) arrays
paired with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to achieve
high classification accuracy, these systems are fundamentally
constrained by high inference latency, prohibitive costs, and
computational overhead unsuitable for low-power edge micro-
controllers.
Conversely, utilizing low-cost, single-channel AC-coupled
amplifiers presents a severe physical limitation: the inability to
spatially isolate distinct muscle bellies. This results in differen-
tial signal cancellation, making fine motor classification highly
ambiguous. Traditional machine learning models trained in
static laboratory conditions frequently degrade in real-world
deployments due to user-to-user variance in muscle density,
skin impedance, and hardware placement.
To bridge the gap between low-cost hardware and
enterprise-grade deployment, this research proposes a highly
optimized, dual-model sEMG classification architecture.The
core contribution of this work is the demonstration
of a sub-10ms, single-channel BCI that resolves spatial
crosstalk via an “Anatomical Hack” and dynamic Zero-
Shot Calibration, achieving high functional stability with-
out deep learning overhead.The primary objectives of this
study are:
1) To demonstrate an “anatomical hack” leveraging hor-
izontal flexor sensor placement to achieve fine-motor
resolution on a single AC-coupled channel.
2) To implement a Zero-Shot Guided Onboarding calibra-
tion sequence that mathematically standardizes dynamic
user environments in under 10 seconds.
3) To drastically reduce computational latency (<10 ms per
frame) while maintaining functional UI stability through
temporal smoothing algorithms.
4) To mathematically quantify the detrimental impact of
human reaction-time latency on sEMG training datasets
via a systematic ablation study.
II. RELATEDWORK
Current research trajectories in sEMG-based gesture recog-
nition generally bifurcate into two domains: high-density ar-
rays (HD-sEMG) leveraging deep learning, and sparse config-
urations optimized for edge deployment.
A. Deep Learning Latency vs. Edge ML
Recent work has heavily shifted toward deep learning
frameworks. Nie et al. utilized heavy BiLSTM architectures
for continuous motion estimation, introducing significant la-
tency unsuitable for micro-edge deployment [2]. Foundation
models, such as the generalized neuromotor interface by
Kaifosh et al., offer out-of-the-box generalization using Con-
formers but require over 1.2 million FLOPs per inference
[1]. While Abu-Samah et al. successfully deployed TinyML
=== Page 2 ===
XGBoost models for slow-moving autonomic stress detec-
tion [3], our architecture tightly couples XGBoost with sub-
10ms temporal smoothing specifically optimized for high-
frequency real-time motor control. Furthermore, while recent
edge-computing advancements by Zanghieri et al. (2024)
successfully deploy Temporal Convolutional Networks (TCNs)
on ultra-low-power microcontrollers, their approach relies on
incremental online learning that demands continuous com-
putational overhead [13]. Our architecture avoids continuous
on-device training entirely by utilizing a frozen XGBoost
manifold.
B. Single-Channel Constraints and Spatial Ambiguity
The primary limitation of single-channel systems is
“crosstalk”—the superposition of signals from multiple muscle
groups. To combat spatial ambiguity, Douglas et al. relied
on physical 3D scanning to mathematically compensate for
electrode shift [4], while Pereira et al. augmented distributions
with HD-sEMG channel subsets [5]. Lara et al. utilized dense,
muscle-specific arrays to reduce inter-channel interference [6].
As highlighted in recent comprehensive reviews, mitigating the
calibration burden caused by physical electrode shift and cross-
user data distribution asymmetry remains a primary challenge
[14]. Rather than relying on multi-task learning or complex
data manipulation to artificially augment training sets against
spatial shifts [14], our single-channel framework bypasses
HD-sEMG entirely. We utilize an “Anatomical Hack” and
polarity-sensitive statistical features (Kurtosis) to naturally
reject adjacent muscle interference without spatial redundancy.
C. Real-Time Calibration and Drift
A persistent hurdle is signal non-stationarity caused by fluc-
tuating skin impedance. Haxel et al. tackled this via complex
continual online finetuning (EDAPT) [7], while Zhang et al.
required longitudinal multi-session clinical data collection to
converge on operational parameters [8]. Other approaches, like
Lin et al., forcefully hybridized sEMG with high-frequency
SSVEP EEG caps to brute-force robustness [9]. Recent
frameworks attempt to solve inter-session impedance drift
through masked time-frequency modeling and adversarial do-
main alignment [15]. While these self-supervised approaches
effectively learn subject-invariant representations, they demand
hybrid Convolution-Transformer backbones [15]. Our Zero-
Shot Guided Onboarding replaces computationally expensive
continuous adaptation and heavy hardware with a deterministic
3-second Z-score standardization, normalizing skin impedance
drift instantly via anO(N)linear transformation.
III. HARDWARECONSTRAINTS ANDPHYSIOLOGICAL
ADAPTATIONS
A. Limitations of Single-Channel AC-Coupled Amplification
To prioritize affordability and reusability, this architecture
utilizes a single-channel, AC-coupled differential amplifier
(Anthriq/Nexstem specification) interfaced directly with dry
gold surface electrodes. While highly efficient and chemically
inert, AC-coupled hardware introduces a severe physical con-
straint: the system strips all direct current (DC) voltage offsets,
forcibly centering the waveform at 0.00V .
Consequently, the differential reading suffers from spatial
ambiguity. During complex multi-finger gestures, the co-
contraction of adjacent muscle groups leads to destructive
signal interference. A traditional machine learning model
relying purely on signal amplitude cannot reliably differentiate
between the actuation of an index finger and a thumb when
both generate overlapping microvolt bursts on a single axis.
B. The “Anatomical Hack” for Spatial Resolution
To overcome this hardware limitation, we implemented a
physiological adaptation for electrode placement. Rather than
utilizing standard longitudinal placement along the muscle
belly, the electrodes were oriented horizontally across the
flexor digitorum superficialis and the flexor pollicis longus.
By placing the gold positive terminal on the radial aspect
(oriented toward the thumb) and the gold negative terminal
on the ulnar aspect (oriented toward the index and middle
fingers), the system physically forces isolated finger actuations
to produce opposing electrical polarities. Flexing the thumb
draws the differential voltage into a positive skew, while
flexing the index finger draws it into a negative skew. This
strategy allows the classification algorithms to rely on polarity-
sensitive mathematical features.
IV. REAL-TIMESIGNALPROCESSINGARCHITECTURE
To extract deterministic intent from chaotic biological volt-
ages, the raw analog signal is routed through a rigid, dual-
buffer Digital Signal Processing (DSP) pipeline.
Fig. 1. Digital Signal Processing Pipeline. (Top) Raw AC-Coupled sEMG.
(Middle) 20-450Hz Bandpass Filtered. (Bottom) 5Hz Linear Envelope.
A. Digital DRL and Artifact Suppression
To combat 50Hz electromagnetic interference, we imple-
mented a digital Driven Right Leg (DRL) equivalent via an
Infinite Impulse Response (IIR) notch filter (ω 0 = 50Hz,
Q= 30):
H(z) = 1−2 cos(ω 0)z−1 +z −2
1−2rcos(ω 0)z−1 +r 2z−2 (1)
=== Page 3 ===
Following noise attenuation, the signal passes through a 4th-
order Butterworth bandpass filter (20Hz and 450Hz) to isolate
motor unit action potentials from movement artifacts.
B. The EMG Linear Envelope
Because the amplifier centers the raw signal at 0.00V , the
algorithm must trace the macroscopic contour of the muscle
contraction. The signal undergoes full-wave rectification fol-
lowed by a 5Hz lowpass filter, quantified locally by the Root
Mean Square (RMS):
RMS=
vuut 1
N
NX
i=1
x2
i (2)
To prevent digital edge-ringing, the pipeline maintains a con-
tinuous 1-second rolling background buffer, safely slicing only
the most recent 300ms window for feature extraction.
V. DYNAMICFEATUREENGINEERING
A. The Reaction-Time Purge
When a user is visually prompted to perform a gesture,
there is a physiological latency before steady-state motor
unit recruitment occurs, known as Electromechanical Delay
(EMD). To capture early intent, Chen et al. leveraged massive
1.5-second pre-movement EEG-EMG windows [10], while Xi
et al. utilized complex Hill-based state-space kinematic mod-
eling to account for delays [11]. Discarding heavy kinematic
simulation, our pipeline enforces a strict, deterministic 600ms
“Reaction-Time Purge.” By programmatically slicing the first
600ms from every recorded gesture block, the XGBoost model
inherently isolates pure intent, training exclusively on the
deterministic, peak-contraction phase. By programmatically
slicing the first 600ms from every recorded gesture block, the
XGBoost model trains exclusively on the deterministic, peak-
contraction phase.
TABLE I
FEATURESPACEDEFINITIONS ANDRELEVANCE
Feature Metric Physical Interpretation / Relevance
RMS / MA VGeneral measure of muscle effort/volume.
Waveform LengthCaptures signal complexity and frequency
amplitude.
Zero CrossingsSpectral proxy; shifts indicate muscle fa-
tigue.
Env. Max/MeanExtracts peak force from the 5Hz linear
envelope.
SkewnessIdentifies asymmetrical firing (Anatomical
Hack).
KurtosisDetects sharp, impulsive MUAP bursts
(Anatomical Hack).
B. Feature Space Separation
As outlined in Table I, the feature extraction pipelines
were bifurcated. TheGross Motor Modelutilized 13 strictly
polarity-invariant features (e.g., MA V , Variance, Waveform
Length) to ensure immunity to accidental electrode shifting.
C. XGBoost Objective Formulation
To ensure microsecond inference latency suitable for edge
deployment, we utilized eXtreme Gradient Boosting (XG-
Boost). The model optimizes a regularized objective function
at each iterationtto build an ensemble of decision trees.
Using a second-order Taylor expansion, the objective function
is defined as:
L(t) =
nX
i=1

gift(xi) + 1
2 hif 2
t (xi)

+ Ω(ft)(3)
whereg i andh i are the first and second-order gradient
statistics of the loss function,x i is the extracted feature vector,
andΩ(f t) =γT+ 1
2 λ||w||2 penalizes tree complexity to pre-
vent overfitting on the limited 3-second zero-shot calibration
data. Skewness was mathematically implemented to capture
the degree of asymmetry generated by the opposing flexor
actuations:
Skewness=
1
N
PN
i=1(xi −¯x)3

1
N
PN
i=1(xi −¯x)2
3/2 (4)
This formulation ensures that radial (thumb) and ulnar (index)
contractions map to distinct, quantifiable directional tails in
the probability distribution of the 300ms window.
Fig. 2. XGBoost Feature Importance revealing the dominance of polarity-
sensitive features (Kurtosis and Skewness) in fine-motor classification.
VI. ALGORITHMICCLASSIFICATION ANDTEMPORAL
SMOOTHING
A. Zero-Shot Guided Onboarding
Because dry gold electrodes are highly sensitive to the
accumulation of sweat—which acts as a natural electrolyte
over time and drastically lowers contact impedance—model
degradation across sessions is a severe risk. To prevent this,
we implemented a Zero-Shot Guided Onboarding sequence.
The system dynamically calculates the unique Mean (µ) and
Standard Deviation (σ) of the user’s current microvolt range
at the gold-skin interface during a 3-second baseline phase.
=== Page 4 ===
B. Temporal Smoothing Logic
Raw statistical classification is insufficient for BCI con-
trol due to natural signal stochasticity. While recent ap-
proaches like Soroushmojdehi et al. implemented majority
voting over few-shot query samples within deep Siamese
networks—adding measurable buffering time [12]—we imple-
mented a highly optimized temporal majority-vote algorithm
acting as a software debounce natively coupled to XGBoost.
This requires consistent multi-frame confidence before trigger-
ing UI outputs without violating sub-10ms constraints.
Algorithm 1Live Inference & Temporal Smoothing
1:Input:Continuous sEMG streamS, Trained ModelM
2:Onboarding:Calibrateµ calib, σcalib from 3s baseline
3:Initialize:Buf f erf ilter←[1000],Queue preds ←[5]
4:whileLive Inference Activedo
5:Append new 100 samples toBuf f er f ilter
6:S clean, Senv ←ApplyFilters(Buf f erf ilter)
7:Slice 300ms windowW←S clean[−300 :]
8:W norm ←(W−µ calib)/σcalib
9:F eatures←Extract(W norm, Senv[−300 :])
10:P red, Conf←M.P redict(F eatures)
11:PushP redtoQueue preds
12:ifConf >0.60andMajority(Queue preds)==P red
then
13:Trigger UI Command
14:end if
15:end while
VII. EXPERIMENTALSETUP ANDRESULTS
A. Dataset Compilation and Protocol
A robust, proprietary dataset was engineered specifically to
train the dual-model architecture. Data collection was facil-
itated via a custom, multi-threaded Python GUI executing a
strict temporal protocol. For each recording session, users were
visually prompted to perform alternating blocks of 3-second
active contractions followed by 3-second resting baselines,
repeated for 10 cycles per gesture.
This stringent protocol yielded over 125,000 raw voltage
rows per user file. After applying the 600ms Reaction-Time
Purge to eliminate transient noise, the remaining deterministic
data was sliced into 300ms windows with a 150ms over-
lap. The finalized dataset comprised 9,023 mathematically
balanced, continuous sliding windows compiled across four
distinct subjects, ensuring sufficient variance in muscle density
and baseline impedance to validate the zero-shot calibration.
B. Ablation Study Results
The Gross Motor model achieved a baseline cross-subject
statistical accuracy of 75.46%. The ablation study (Table II)
reveals the critical importance of the proposed methodologies.
Omitting the 600ms Reaction-Time Purge caused accuracy
to plummet by nearly 10%. Furthermore, an isolated ablation
test on the Fine Motor model validated the Anatomical Hack.
When polarity-sensitive features (Skewness and Kurtosis) were
TABLE II
COMPREHENSIVEEVALUATIONMETRICS(GROSSMOTORMODEL)
Model Configuration Acc. Prec. Rec. F1
Proposed Architecture 75.4% 0.76 0.75 0.75
W/O Linear Envelope 75.2% 0.74 0.75 0.74
W/O Frequency Features 74.5% 0.73 0.74 0.73
W/O 600ms Purge 66.1% 0.65 0.66 0.65
stripped, accuracy degraded to 36.28%—functionally equiva-
lent to random guessing.
Fig. 3. Fine Motor Confusion Matrix validating the Anatomical Hack.
C. Computational Latency and Real-Time Viability
A critical goal of this architecture was edge-device viability.
Table III benchmarks the end-to-end latency of a 300ms data
window.
TABLE III
SYSTEMLATENCYBENCHMARK
Pipeline Stage Latency (ms)
DSP Filter + Feature Extraction + Inference9.464 ms
The entire pipeline executes in under 10 ms, yielding
an effective processing capacity exceeding 100 Frames Per
Second (FPS).
VIII. HARDWAREINTEGRATION: PROSTHETIC
ACTUATION
To validate the real-world utility of the temporal smoothing
algorithm, the inference pipeline was integrated with a custom
3D-printed prosthetic arm.
A. Serial Communication and Motor Control
The prosthetic hardware relies on an embedded Arduino
microcontroller tasked with actuating high-torque servos con-
nected to synthetic tendon strings. Rather than processing raw
=== Page 5 ===
analog data internally, the Arduino functions purely as a high-
speed command receiver.
Upon the ‘collections.deque‘ majority-vote algorithm reach-
ing a consensus with>60% XGBoost confidence, the Python
architecture transmits a localized byte-character (e.g.,’F’for
Fist,’I’for Index) via universal serial bus (USB) to the
microcontroller. This establishes a master-slave architecture
where the computationally heavy DSP and inference work-
loads are handled by the edge computer, while the microcon-
troller executes the electromechanical actuation.
B. Latency Mitigation in Physical Hardware
Because the software pipeline achieves a sub-10ms latency
(Table III), the overarching system latency is almost entirely
bound by the mechanical travel time of the servos. The tem-
poral smoothing queue effectively functions as a mechanical
debounce, preventing the servos from jittering or overheating
due to transient misclassifications inherent in raw sEMG data
streams.
IX. DISCUSSION ANDLIMITATIONS
While the proposed architecture successfully bridges the gap
between low-cost hardware and functional stability, certain
limitations remain inherent to single-channel systems. First,
the horizontal flexor placement requires a high degree of pre-
cision; anatomical differences between users mean the “sweet
spot” for generating opposing polarities can vary by several
millimeters. Secondly, while the Zero-Shot Guided Onboard-
ing successfully mitigates initial skin impedance variations,
prolonged continuous usage (exceeding 60 minutes) introduces
signal drift due to sweat accumulation and muscle fatigue,
which a static 3-second initialization cannot recursively cor-
rect. Future iterations of this work will explore adaptive
algorithms capable of recalibratingµandσdynamically in
the background.
X. CONCLUSION
By combining horizontal flexor placement with polarity-
sensitive feature extraction, dynamic zero-shot calibration,
and temporal smoothing, we have demonstrated that single-
channel, AC-coupled sEMG sensors can achieve highly stable
intent recognition. This sub-10ms architecture overcomes the
spatial ambiguity of differential amplifiers, paving the way
for seamless integration with low-cost haptic prosthetics and
edge-deployed virtual interfaces.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Kaifosh et al., “A generic non-invasive neuromotor interface for
human-computer interaction,”Nature, vol. 645, no. 8081, 2025.
[2] B. Nie et al., “A Novel Estimation Method of Lower Limb Continuous
Motion by sEMG Signal Based on BILSTM Neural Network,”IEEE
Int. Conf. on Real-time Computing and Robotics (RCAR), 2025.
[3] A. Abu-Samah et al., “Deployment of TinyML-Based Stress Classifi-
cation Using Computational Constrained Health Wearable,”Electronics,
vol. 14, no. 4, 2025.
[4] F. Douglas, M. Pei, and C. Kuo, “Characterizing the Effect of Electrode
Shift & Sensor Reapplication on Common sEMG Features,”IEEE Trans.
Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., 2024.
[5] J. Pereira et al., “Tackling Electrode Shift in Gesture Recognition with
HD-EMG Electrode Subsets,”IEEE ICASSP, pp. 1786-1790, 2024.
[6] J. E. Lara et al., “Muscle-Specific High-Density Electromyography
Arrays for Hand Gesture Classification,”IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
vol. 69, pp. 1758-1766, 2022.
[7] L. Haxel et al., “EDAPT: Towards Calibration-Free BCIs with Continual
Online Adaptation,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10474, 2025.
[8] R. Zhang et al., “An adaptive brain-computer interface to enhance motor
recovery after stroke,”IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 31,
pp. 2268-2278, 2023.
[9] Y . Lin et al., “A Novel Hybrid BCI Combining High-Frequency SSVEP
and sEMG for Spelling Applications,”IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform.,
vol. 27, no. 10, pp. 4872-4883, 2023.
[10] Z. Chen et al., “Multimodal fusion method based on EEG-EMG func-
tional connectivity to detect sitting and standing intentions,”Frontiers
in Neurosci., 2025.
[11] X. Xi et al., “Simultaneous and Continuous Estimation of Joint Angles
Based on Surface Electromyography State-Space Model,”IEEE Sensors
J., 2021.
[12] S. Soroushmojdehi et al., “A Siamese Neural Network for sEMG-Based
Gesture Recognition,”Frontiers in Neurosci., 2022.
[13] M. Zanghieri et al., “sEMG-driven Hand Dynamics Estimation with
Incremental Online Learning on a Parallel Ultra-Low-Power Microcon-
troller,”IEEE Xplore, 2024.
[14] X. Wang et al., “Robust myoelectric pattern recognition methods for
reducing users’ calibration burden: challenges and future,”Frontiers in
Bioengineering and Biotechnology, 2024.
[15] Author Name et al., “Calibration-free sEMG intention recognition
via self-supervised pretraining and adversarial domain alignment,”Re-
searchGate, 2025.